[docs] refactor EAS Build e2e tests docs (#30112)
expo/expo: docs/pages/build-reference/e2e-tests.mdx

---
title: Run E2E tests on EAS Build
sidebar_title: Run E2E tests
description: Learn how to set up and run E2E tests on EAS Build with Maestro.
---

import { ContentSpotlight } from '~/ui/components/ContentSpotlight';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

> > **info** This guide will evolve over time as support for testing workflows in EAS Build improves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **info** This guide will evolve over time as support for E2E testing in EAS Build improves.
```

In this guide, you will learn how to create and run E2E tests on EAS Build using [Maestro](https://maestro.mobile.dev/), which is one of the most popular tools for running E2E tests in mobile apps.

> In the following steps, the example demonstrates how to configure your EAS Build Maestro E2E tests workflow using the [default Expo template](/more/create-expo/#--template). For your own app, you will need to adjust the flows to match your app's UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example demonstrates how to configure your EAS Build Maestro E2E tests workflow using the [default Expo template](/more/create-expo/#--template). For your own app, you will need to adjust the flows to match your app's UI.
```

<Step label="1">
## Initialize a new project

You can skip this step if you already have an existing Expo project.

Create a new project using the following commands:

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '# Initialize a new project',
    '$ npx create-expo-app@latest eas-tests-example',
    '',
    '# Move into the project directory',
    '$ cd eas-tests-example',
  ]}
  cmdCopy="npx create-expo-app eas-tests-example && cd eas-tests-example"
/>
</Step>

<Step label="2">
## Configure EAS Build

You can skip this step if you already have EAS Build configured for your project.

The following command creates a new project on Expo servers for your app and creates [**eas.json**](/build/eas-json/) in the project's root directory:

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '$ eas init',
    '',
    '$ eas build:configure',
  ]}
/>
</Step>

<Step label="3">
## Add example Maestro test cases

> This is how the UI of the app created from the default Expo template looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is what the UI of the app created from the default Expo template looks like:
```
I think it's either "what…like" or "how"

<div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'center' }}>
  <ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/01-home.png" className="max-w-[360px]" />
  <ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/02-explore.png" className="max-w-[360px]" />
</div>

Let's create two simple Maestro flows for the example app. Start by creating a directory called **maestro** in the root of your project directory. This directory will contain the flows that you will configure and should be at the same level as **eas.json**.

> Inside it, create a new flow called **home.yaml**. This flow will launch the app and assert that the text "Welcome!" is visible on the home screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside, create a new file called **home.yaml**. This flow will launch the app and assert that the text "Welcome!" is visible on the home screen.
```

```yaml maestro/home.yaml
appId: dev.expo.eastestsexample # This is an example app id. Replace it with your app id.
---
- launchApp
- assertVisible: 'Welcome!'
```

Next, create a new flow called **expand_test.yaml**. This flow will open the "Explore" screen in the example app, click on the "File-based routing" collapsible, and assert that the text "This app has two screens" is visible on the screen.

```yaml maestro/expand_test.yaml
appId: dev.expo.eastestsexample # This is an example app id. Replace it with your app id.
---
- launchApp
- tapOn: 'Explore.*'
- tapOn: '.*File-based routing'

> - assertVisible: 'This app has two screens.*'

Reviewer: Should we also let people know how to test the workflows they're developing on their machines?

Author: Yeah, good idea! Do you mean by running `maestro test meastro/home.yml`?

```

</Step>

<Step label="4">
## Create a custom build workflow for running Maestro E2E tests

The easiest way to run Maestro E2E tests on EAS Build is to create a [custom build workflow](/custom-builds/get-started/). This workflow will build your app and run the Maestro tests on it.

Start by adding a custom build config file to your project. Create a directory **.eas/build** at the same level as **eas.json** in the project. The path and the name of both directories are important for EAS Build to identify that a project contains a custom build config.

> Inside it, create a new config file called **build-and-maestro-test.yml**. This file defines the custom build workflow config that you want to run. Workflow contains steps that are executed during the custom build process. This custom build config will execute the [`eas/build`](custom-builds/schema/#easbuild) custom function group to create a build and then the [`eas/maestro_test`](custom-builds/schema/#easmaestro_test) which is an all-in-one custom function group that installs Maestro, prepares a testing environment (Android Emulator or iOS Simulator) and tests the app using flows specified by the `flow_path` input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside, create a new config file called **build-and-maestro-test.yml**. This file defines the custom build workflow config that you want to run. Workflow contains steps that are executed during the custom build process. This custom build config will execute the [`eas/build`](custom-builds/schema/#easbuild) custom function group to create a build and then the [`eas/maestro_test`](custom-builds/schema/#easmaestro_test) which is an all-in-one custom function group that installs Maestro, prepares a testing environment (Android Emulator or iOS Simulator) and tests the app using flows specified by the `flow_path` input.
```

> **Warning** We have observed that Maestro tests often time out if run on images with Xcode 15.0 or 15.2. Use the [`latest` image](/build-reference/infrastructure/#configuring-build-environment) to avoid any issues.

```json eas.json
{
  "build": {
    /* @hide ... */ /* @end */
    "build-and-maestro-test": {
      "withoutCredentials": true,
      "config": "build-and-maestro-test.yml",
      "android": {
        "buildType": "apk",
        "image": "latest"
      },
      "ios": {
        "simulator": true,
        "image": "latest"
      }
    }
  },
  /* @hide ... */ /* @end */
}
```

</Step>

<Step label="5">
## Build your app and run E2E tests on EAS Build

To execute a custom build using the `build-and-maestro-test` profile that will build your app and run the Maestro E2E tests afterward, run the following command:

<Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --profile build-and-maestro-test']} />

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="Logs of successful Maestro tests"
  src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/03-logs.png"
  className="max-w-[600px]"
/>

> When the flow fails, any Maestro artifacts are automatically uploaded as build artifacts. This includes screenshots saved at `/Users/expo/.maestro/tests` (the default destination). You can download them from the build page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the flow fails, any Maestro artifacts are automatically uploaded as build artifacts. This includes screenshots saved at `~/.maestro/tests` (the default destination). You can download them from the build page.
```

Author: good catch!

---
title: Run E2E tests on EAS Build
sidebar_title: Run E2E tests
description: Learn how to set up and run E2E tests on EAS Build with Maestro.
---

import { ContentSpotlight } from '~/ui/components/ContentSpotlight';
import { Terminal } from '~/ui/components/Snippet';
import { Step } from '~/ui/components/Step';

> **Warning** This guide will evolve over time as support for testing workflows in EAS Build improves.

> In this guide, you will learn how to run E2E tests on EAS Build using one of the most popular tools for running E2E tests in mobile apps - [Maestro](https://maestro.mobile.dev/).
> In the following steps, we will try to show you using an example how you can configure your EAS Build Maestro E2E tests workflow today:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will learn how to create and run E2E tests on EAS Build using [Maestro](https://maestro.mobile.dev/), which is one of the most popular tools for running E2E tests in mobile apps.

In the following steps, the example demonstrates how to configure your EAS Build Maestro E2E tests workflow using the [default Expo template](/more/create-expo/#--template). For your own app, you will need to adjust the flows to match your app's UI.
```

Let's divide this into two paragraphs and also callout that this guide demonstrates an example using the default template. adding that callout in step 3 is somewhat surprising from end user's perspective. We can also link to the default template reference.

<Step label="1">

> ### Initialize a new project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Initialize a new project
```

Let's correct order of heading levels for all heading sections.

You can skip this step if you already have an existing Expo project.

> Start with the following commands to create a new project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a new project using the following commands:
```

Let's be more actionable here.

<Terminal
  cmd={[
    '# Initialize a new project',
    '$ npx create-expo-app@latest eas-tests-example',

>     '# Move into the project directory',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    '',
    '# Move into the project directory',
```

Let's add a space between two commands.

  <ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/01-home.png" className="max-w-[400px]" />
  <ContentSpotlight src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/02-explore.png" className="max-w-[400px]" />
</div>

We will now create two simple Maestro flows for the example app to show you the general idea.
If you want to learn more about Maestro flows and how to write them, check out the [Maestro documentation](https://maestro.mobile.dev).

To do it create a directory **maestro** at the same level as **eas.json**.
For example, if the **eas.json** file is at the root of your project, create the directory at that level.

Inside it, you can create a new flow called **home.yaml**. This flow will launch the app and assert that the text "Welcome!" is visible on the home screen.

```yaml maestro/home.yaml
appId: dev.expo.eastestsexample # This is an example app id, replace it with your app id!
---
- launchApp
- assertVisible: 'Welcome!'
```

Next, create a new flow called **expand_test.yaml**. This flow will open the "Explore" screen, click on the "File-based routing" collapsible and assert that the text "This app has two screens" is visible on the screen.

```yaml maestro/expand_test.yaml

> appId: dev.expo.eastestsexample # This is an example app id, replace it with your app id!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
appId: dev.expo.eastestsexample # This is an example app id. Replace it with your app id.
```

---
- launchApp
- tapOn: 'Explore.*'
- tapOn: '.*File-based routing'
- assertVisible: 'This app has two screens.*'
```

</Step>

<Step label="4">

> ### Create custom build workflow for running Maestro E2E tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Create a custom build workflow for running Maestro E2E tests
```

> The easiest way to run Maestro E2E tests on EAS Build is to create a [custom build workflow](/custom-builds/get-started/).
> This workflow will build your app and run the Maestro tests on it.
> 
> To do it you must add a custom build config file in your project. Create a directory **.eas/build** at the same level as **eas.json**.
> For example, if the **eas.json** file is at the root of your project, create the directory at that level.
> The path and the name of both directories are important for EAS Build to identify that a project contains a custom build config.
> 
> Inside it, you can create a new config file called **build-and-maestro-test.yml**.
> This file defines the custom build workflow config that you want to run.
> Workflow contains steps that are executed during the custom build process.
> This custom build config will execute the [`eas/build`](custom-builds/schema/#easbuild) custom function group to create a build and then the [`eas/maestro_test`](custom-builds/schema/#easmaestro_test) all-in-one custom function group that installs Maestro, prepares a testing environment (Android Emulator or iOS Simulator) and tests the app using flows specified by the `flow_path` input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The easiest way to run Maestro E2E tests on EAS Build is to create a [custom build workflow](/custom-builds/get-started/). This workflow will build your app and run the Maestro tests on it.

Start by adding a custom build config file to your project. Create a directory **.eas/build** at the same level as **eas.json** in the project. The path and the name of both directories are important for EAS Build to identify that a project contains a custom build config.

Inside it, create a new config file called **build-and-maestro-test.yml**. This file defines the custom build workflow config that you want to run. Workflow contains steps that are executed during the custom build process. This custom build config will execute the [`eas/build`](custom-builds/schema/#easbuild) custom function group to create a build and then the [`eas/maestro_test`](custom-builds/schema/#easmaestro_test) which is an all-in-one custom function group that installs Maestro, prepares a testing environment (Android Emulator or iOS Simulator) and tests the app using flows specified by the `flow_path` input.
```

We can format this in the way we usually write docs in other files.

```yaml .eas/build/build-and-maestro-test.yml
build:
  name: Create a build and run Maestro tests on it
  steps:
    - eas/build
    - eas/maestro_test:
        inputs:
          flow_path: |
            maestro/home.yaml
            maestro/expand_test.yaml
```

> Now let's modify your **eas.json** by adding a new [build profile](/build/eas-json/#build-profiles) called `build-and-maestro-test` that will be used to run the custom build config from the **build-and-maestro-test.yml** file.
> This configuration will build the simulator/emulator version of your app and run the Maestro tests on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now modify the **eas.json** by adding a new [build profile](/build/eas-json/#build-profiles) called `build-and-maestro-test`. It will be used to run the custom build config from the **build-and-maestro-test.yml** file. This configuration will build the emulator/simulator version of your app and run the Maestro tests on it.
```

> > **Warning** We have observed that Maestro tests often time out if run on images with Xcode 15.0 or 15.2. Please use the `latest` image to avoid any issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Warning** We have observed that Maestro tests often time out if run on images with Xcode 15.0 or 15.2. Use the [`latest` image](/build-reference/infrastructure/#configuring-build-environment) to avoid any issues.
```

Let's avoid using words like "please" and also add link to build server infra page which explains difference between different images.

```json eas.json
{

>   ...,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  "build": {

>     ...,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    /* @hide ... */ /* @end */
```

    "build-and-maestro-test": {
      "withoutCredentials": true,
      "config": "build-and-maestro-test.yml",
      "android": {
        "buildType": "apk",
        "image": "latest"
      },
      "ios": {
        "simulator": true,
        "image": "latest"
      }
    }
  },

>   ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  /* @hide ... */ /* @end */
```

We annotate these comments to indicate there can be more content in the file.

}
```

</Step>

<Step label="5">

> ### Build your app and run E2E tests on EAS Build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Build your app and run E2E tests on EAS Build
```

To execute a custom build using the `build-and-maestro-test` profile that will build your app and run the Maestro E2E tests afterward, run the following command:

> <Terminal cmd={['$ npx eas-cli@latest build --profile build-and-maestro-test']} />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<Terminal cmd={['$ eas build --profile build-and-maestro-test']} />
```

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="Logs of successful Maestro tests"
  src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/03-logs.png"

>   className="max-w-[480px]"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  className="max-w-[600px]"
```

This image appears to be a bit too small. Let's increase its width.

/>

> Any Maestro artifacts including screenshots taken when flow fails that are saved at `/Users/expo/.maestro/tests` (the default destination) will be automatically uploaded as build artifacts. You can download them from the build page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the flow fails, any Maestro artifacts are automatically uploaded as build artifacts. This includes screenshots saved at `/Users/expo/.maestro/tests` (the default destination). You can download them from the build page.
```

Let's start with the use case here which is when the flow is failing and improve this for clarity.

<ContentSpotlight
  alt="Failed Maestro tests artifacts"
  src="/static/images/eas-build/tests/04-artifacts.png"

>   className="max-w-[480px]"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  className="max-w-[600px]"
```

Same as above.

/>
</Step>

> If you want to build more advanced custom builds workflows check the [custom build schema reference](/custom-builds/schema) for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## More

If you want to build more advanced custom builds workflows, see the [custom build schema reference](/custom-builds/schema/) for more information.

To learn more about Maestro flows and how to write them, see the [Maestro documentation](https://maestro.mobile.dev).
```

Let's add a section here to link to custom build schema doc and Maestro documentation.
